---
layout: post
title: The Companies
category: landscape-analysis
tags: financial-analysis
description: The paradox of the STM publishing industry is that it has very high visibility over its revenues in the next two to three years (because of multi-year contracts) and very little beyond this time frame.
permalink: /landscape-analysis/the-companies
date: 2019-03-29 05:00:00
---

## Elsevier

**The Basics**

Elsevier is the name usually attributed to RELX Group’s Scientific, Technical, and Medical business. RELX Group (known until 2015 as Reed Elsevier) is a London-based provider of information, data, and analytical services for corporate, professional, and academic customers. Elsevier is RELX’s largest area of activity, accounting for 33.7% of its revenues but 40.5% of its profits. It is also the most profitable business within RELX’s portfolio, although Risk & Business Analytics is a close second.

**How well does Elsevier compete in journal publishing?**

Elsevier is not the largest publisher of STM journals in terms of titles (Springer Nature Group publishes about 3,000 titles), but it has the largest journal revenues: Springer Nature Group had 2017 revenues of €1.64/$1.9 (at an exchange rate of 1.16) million, but about 30% of that was books, leaving journal revenues at about $1.333 million, well below Elsevier’s estimated $1.8 million.

There is no undisputed source for market shares in the journal business. STM estimates that the journal market is worth about $10 billion. Assuming that 55% of Elsevier’s 2017 revenues came from journals, that translates into £1.363 million which - at the average exchange rate for the year – equals $1.756 million (a 17.5% market share). This number appears directionally correct, as the approximately 2,500 Elsevier journals account for about 9% of all journals published, and revenues per articles at Elsevier should be much higher than for the average of the industry¹.

Elsevier, however, attracts a disproportionate amount of attention within the academic community because of its profitability and its business practices. Elsevier operates at a 37% reported operating profit margin compared to Springer Nature which operates at a 23% margin. Elsevier has often pursued tone-deaf business practices, which have been viewed as a land grab by the academic community. For example, Elsevier has refused in many countries to sign offsetting deals for publishing Open Access articles in subscription journals and has also engaged in relentless lobbying activity in both the U.S. and Europe to extend copyright in novel directions. Elsevier now routinely bypasses librarians and attempts to strike deals with other offices within large academic institutions. In response to the concerns of its critics, Elsevier would argue that it enjoys record revenues and profitability for the following reasons: it manages itself well, researchers want to be published in their journals, it funds activities for Open Science and for integrity in research more than any other publisher, and it sells data analytics services because the academic and research communities need them.

Both sides of this argument miss an essential point. The adversarial relationship between Elsevier and academic librarians (and some researchers) is an anachronism and a throwback to management practices that have long disappeared in virtually every other industry. The existence of SPARC, the periodic Elsevier boycotts from some groups of academics, and the announcements from European consortia (and, more recently, from the University of California) willing to lose access to Elsevier journals rather than agree to requested price increases all point to a flaw in how Elsevier (and some competitors) are run.

Historically, Elsevier has pursued price increases in the region of 5% annually, and justified this request with the parallel 5% growth in articles it publishes. This argument is flawed for two reasons: it assumes that there are neither productivity gains nor scale economies anywhere in the business. The first part of the argument is surprising – if productivity at Elsevier does not rise, then management is not doing its job properly – and the second part of the argument is wrong – administration or IT staff does not rise just because more articles are published. In light of the financial pressure on academic library budgets, refusing to pass along some of the savings is strictly a commercial and business decision, but it does invite retaliation from customers when possible. We have seen that Elsevier is effectively reinvesting some of these gains in new products and services which offer no benefit to libraries, as they are targeted to other users within universities (and even to completely different customers). In other words, librarians are asked to bear the financial burden of investments which will benefit some other category of customers, as well as the shareholders and management of Elsevier.

Another issue with the request for an annual increase based on a larger number of articles published is the quality of those additional articles. Just because it is additional research does not make it equal in quality. In general, a large amount of published research may end up of limited or no use to subscribers. Data released by ten UK universities on readership in chemistry and life sciences journals show that 50% of journals account for 5 to 10% of all article readership (Exhibits 1 and 2). This pattern applies to Elsevier journals as well: when New Mexico State University decided in 2010 not to renew one of its collection contracts with Elsevier, it published the data relating access to readership for the journals included in the collection (Exhibit 3). In the absence of obligations for leading journals to add articles at a pace that is at least in line with the overall growth rate of articles published, there is a significant risk that the average “quality” of the articles will decline. This, in turn, is a contentious issue for librarians asked to fund a growing number of journals and articles with no guarantee that their quality will be adequate.

**Elsevier and the future of scholarly publishing - what strategy?**

With this background in mind, it is no surprise that Elsevier is thinking about what the future may have in store. In spite of the fact that scale economies in the business would favor acquiring other publishers, in the past few years, Elsevier has not pursued significant acquisitions in academic journals. The company has invested, instead, to acquire platforms and tools which would broaden its range of products and allow the company to attract new customers beyond its traditional base of research libraries. In fact, in a 2015 investor presentation, Elsevier explicitly indicated its intent to increasingly serve university administrations, funding bodies, and governments with tools aimed at estimating and improving the productivity of research and optimizing funding decisions.

These investments have not been huge, but have been much larger than would make financial sense. Press reports indicate that Mendeley and SSRN cost between £100 and 125 million ($130 and 165 million) and Bepress may have cost between $100 million and $130 million. Mendeley and SSRN have business models which are unlikely to ever become truly profitable as standalone entities, while Bepress was profitable at the time of the acquisition (but the price paid still looks very expensive).

**What is Elsevier's strategy?**

Elsevier’s answer to this question has probably evolved over time. As we previously mentioned, it is not unusual for a company to enter a business or acquire assets with one strategy in mind and then broaden its scope as it learns more about the opportunities offered by the acquired business and as the industry landscape evolves. Several interviews have surfaced four themes which we believe are central to the future of Elsevier.
1. **Protect the core journal business.** Elsevier must realize that Open Access (OA) is a significant threat to its economics, given that revenues per article today are in the region of £3,100/$4,100. Elsevier appears to have lowered its revenues/article over time (the total number of articles Elsevier publishes has grown by about 5% CAGR between 2006 and 2014, and reached about 430,000 in 2017), faster than its journal revenue growth of about 4% annually. Even so, Elsevier faces a potentially significant decline in revenues in the case that a full transition to OA takes place, since several surveys and reports indicate that the industry average APC is in the region of $2,250 to $2,400. Elsevier could cut some costs to compensate for lower revenues, but we estimate that, with current estimated costs per article in the region of $2,650, a 10-15% cut would only save about $250 to $400, well below the decline in revenues. Incidentally, research Bernstein conducted years ago with the collaboration of a scholarly journal publisher surfaced that a full transition to OA would lead to savings of 12.5% in its cost base, so a 10 to 15% cost reduction appears eminently reasonable. In this scenario, however, the operating profits of Elsevier would be wiped out almost completely, as both revenues and costs would converge around the $2,250 to $2,400 mark. The best way for Elsevier to protect its profitability to would be to gain a massive market share at the high end of the market that could and would pay for expensive APCs. This, in turn, would be easier if Elsevier could win larger and larger numbers of high quality submissions from authors. In this scenario, Elsevier might be able to publish more high impact articles thanks to early insights into the quality of research (for example, through access to the desktops of researchers through Mendeley).

2. **Improve how Elsevier runs the journal business?** Elsevier already holds one of the largest repositories of data on citations and readership through its various databases (from Scopus and Science Direct to Mendeley, SSRN, and Bepress). Simply put, the more data points Elsevier develops, the better it positions itself to gain insights into developments that will affect its competitive position in the future, often with an early advantage which may be measured in years. For example, Elsevier could identify, through the analysis of research and publication patterns and the quality and reach of their collaboration networks, which researchers are likely to grow into future leaders in their respective fields and offer them editorial board positions on their journals ahead of other publishers. Elsevier could also identify which segments of various disciplines are likely to evolve into the next growth area for research by looking (for example) at project participation patterns, size and quality of teams, and funding bodies’ decisions, targeting these segments with new, dedicated journals ahead of other publishers. Similarly, Elsevier could isolate in advance new trends in interdisciplinary studies, allowing it to establish publication forums where none exist today and even driving funding decisions which lead to accelerated growth for these types of research. Each of these levers could enhance the competitive position of Elsevier, particularly because the company has access to far more data on research patterns than any other publisher (except for Clarivate, which does not have access to content itself).  

   In addition to these strategic opportunities, there are more tactical ones, which may allow the company to run its operations better and at lower costs. For example, Elsevier could identify the editors best suited to work with specific authors to accelerate manuscript editing, or which peers are likely to respond faster and more constructively to requests for peer review on the basis of specific characteristics of articles. The possibilities are many and the opportunity for smaller publishers to replicate these advantages is almost nil because of Elsevier’s size and reach in the marketplace.

3. **Sell insights to universities, funding bodies and governments.** The same insights that would allow Elsevier to offer editorial positions to rising star researchers or to launch new journals ahead of the competition are valuable to universities. Elsevier and Clarivate, as well as smaller competitors like Academic Analytics, already sell tools aimed at assessing the productivity of specific research. Some of these tools are relatively primitive, but it is reasonable to assume they will become better over time (interviews suggest that Clarivate is ahead of Elsevier in terms of quality, but Elsevier is working to fill the gap by offering to test their tools for free with leading research universities). In addition to driving resource allocation, these tools can also affect other core processes of universities. For example, the quality of published research (using the impact factor of journals as a proxy) has played a major role in hiring, promotion, and tenure decisions. Being able to better assess and predict the likely trajectory of Ph.D. candidates, research associates, and Assistant and Associate Professors would be of great value to the leadership of universities. Similarly, being able to target early on which emerging disciplines or subjects are most likely to grow in relevance (to the point of attracting significant incremental funding and students) would allow universities to improve the return on investment in new areas.  

   Moreover, once these tools are deployed, the customers may find it difficult to discontinue usage for several reasons, including equity considerations (using the same assessment tools over time is encouraged in people-related processes, and lack of transparency on how algorithms work would make it difficult to substitute them). In general, the experience of the corporate sector is that users tend to rely on specific third-party data and find it difficult to abandon once it is embedded in their core processes. This means that these services can generate recurring revenues with strong pricing power, and Elsevier is uniquely positioned to offer these services given its access to content and underlying data.

4. **Sell insights to industry or the investment community.** This opportunity may be the most speculative, but it is also, by far, the most valuable. Elsevier, like any other STM publisher, sits on a massive amount of intellectual insights and – increasingly – data. To provide some general estimates, NASDAQ believes that about 30% of its market capitalization (currently about $3 trillion out of a total capitalization of $10 trillion) is derived from academic research. It would make sense for Elsevier to try to capitalize on its early access to academic research (for example, by partnering with industry to exploit insights, or by establishing joint ventures with Venture Capital firms to improve the odds of VC investing).  

   Elsevier seems well aware of the value of text and data mining, as it effectively attempts to prohibit text and data mining of articles outside of its own tools. It is possible that Elsevier only thinks of monetizing this value through the licensing of software that allows third parties to data mine articles and data repositories. One step in this direction is Elsevier’s recent launch of its Entellect platform, a product targeted at life sciences companies that combines access to proprietary company data, Elsevier databases, and academic literature to mine text and data and streamline the R&D process. On the other hand, Elsevier may realize that much more value can be realized by mining the text and data by itself and then selling insights to interested third parties. Our interviews with industry participants indicate that Elsevier’s is unlikely to take such a bold step, but it is entirely possible that management will see the opportunity at some point.

**What could derail Elsevier?**

We see three major threats to Elsevier’s performance going forward and have laid them out below in what we estimate to be declining order of likelihood.
1. **Failure to properly execute their data strategy.** For all the competitive advantages which Elsevier has, their data strategy carries some risks as well. First and foremost, Elsevier is viewed with suspicion within large segments of the academic community. The launch of this SPARC project, for example, is the result of continuing ill will between Elsevier and the academic community. Elsevier has made several efforts to mend fences through a variety of approaches, ranging from donations and sponsorships of academic programs and events to the steady effort to communicate its support for research values through members of the academic community. Despite these efforts, Elsevier has made little headway, in part because – in parallel with these pacification efforts – it continues to lobby for additional copyright protection, it staunchly defends rights which are counter- intuitive to academics (like refusing to allow text and data mining of articles with third party software), and it continues to demand price increases that are viewed as unreasonable and ignore the financial constraints of academic libraries.  

   In addition to these issues, which may lead universities to exercise special care to control or cap the usage of Elsevier data tools and services, Clarivate appears to have a significant lead in the quality of its competing tools. Clarivate also has the following advantages: a reputation for independence, no journal business to protect, and ample funding to maintain their current high-quality leadership. Lastly, Clarivate has the advantage of carrying an Intellectual Property business in its portfolio, which may make it the natural winner in selling services tied to IP exploitation.

2. **A sudden collapse of subscription publishing.**. Historically, shifts in the scholarly communications industry have taken place at a glacial pace. Open access (OA) revenues were still less than $500 million in 2017, or about 5% of total industry revenues, 15 years after the Budapest Open Access Declaration was signed. Of course, revenues undercount the extent of the success of OA because they do not include articles funded in OA through other programs, or the large number of articles made available in OA through repositories rather than journals – the articles available in OA in any form are now closer to 30% annually and rising. However, revenue is what has traditionally mattered to subscription publishers.  

   Nonetheless, a collapse cannot be ruled out completely. Should governments and private funding bodies in the U.S., Japan, and Western Europe agree to abandon embargo periods before mandatory deposit in open repositories as well as disqualify hybrid journals from fulfilling OA mandates (and prove willing to enforce their mandates by publicly excluding violators from future grants), publishers may see submissions to all but a handful of leading journals dry up quickly. The industry may then convert to a pure Gold OA model to secure revenues, but – as mentioned earlier – the relatively high cost structure of Elsevier leaves it poorly equipped to compete in a Gold OA industry. If this were to transpire, Elsevier would have to go through a lengthy period of restructuring, and – in the meanwhile – financial markets would likely show their displeasure by shrinking the valuation of RELX Group, both because Elsevier earnings would collapse and because it would be difficult to see a path to recovery.

   Plan S may or may not lead to a full OA transition. The number (and spending) of the initial supporters is relatively modest, but more countries and funding bodies are expressing an interest in joining, at least in principle. Important issues remain open, however. Will a transition phase, allowing the publication of OA articles in hybrid journal, be allowed or not? For how long? What will trigger the sunset of such phase? Similarly, will caps to APCs be imposed? For how long? At what level? Just to be clear, an indefinitely long transition phase and/or the removal of any APC caps would decrease the impact of Plan S on subscription publishing; conversely, the outright banning of hybrid journals and the imposition of low caps on APCs would dramatically change the publishing landscape.

   In addition, piracy might force a change in the business model. While librarians are careful to point out that using Sci-Hub is not legal and that there are better (and legal) alternatives, awareness of Sci-Hub continues to grow. Elsevier has been at the forefront of legal action to squash Sci-Hub, but efforts, so far, have not been effective. The experience of other media business – first and foremost the recorded music industry – suggest that it is close to impossible to litigate violators of copyright out of existence, since they can take refuge in jurisdictions outside the reach of Western courts, and, even when a company is finally taken down, a new one can quickly rise to take its place, starting a new cycle of litigation. The lesson from the music industry should not be lost on the management of Elsevier (and other publishers): what finally put peer-to-peer services out of business was not a recourse to legal action or technical mechanisms to foil searches, but the introduction of music streaming services which offered a convenient, reasonably priced service that satisfied consumers. In this sense, the scholarly communications industry is fortunate to have a model ready at hand to adopt – OA – rather than needing to look for one and test it. It took about 15 years between the revenue peak of 1999 and the widespread adoption of Spotify for the music industry to find a way out of its decline, and it had the good fortune of finding two companies (Spotify and Apple) willing to incur losses for several years to launch and grow the service.

   We pointed out earlier that Elsevier’s best defense in a fully OA world would be to win a disproportionate amount of high-quality submissions through predictive analytics. The other tool available to mitigate the impact of a shift to OA would be to add more value to articles than what other publishers can provide. Elsevier could try to facilitate search and access, streamline and accelerate editing and peer review, add personal recommendation and sharing tools, and justify higher APCs through demonstrable better usability of its journals and platforms. It is not by chance that Elsevier acquired Plum Analytics in February 2017, a leading provider of altmetrics, as well as Aries Systems (this deal was announced just at the beginning of August 2018). It would make sense for Elsevier to develop deep insights into how articles are used and demonstrate to researchers, funding bodies, and departmental heads the value of publishing with Elsevier (assuming, of course, that such value is demonstrable) to avoid being dragged in price competition with cheaper OA journals.

3. **Goverment Intervention.** Even if the current hybrid system remains in place, it is questionable why Elsevier refuses to enter offsetting deals in most countries. It is difficult to believe that governments offering subsidies for Gold OA publishing (as it happens in Western Europe) intend them as a mechanism aimed at increasing publishers’ revenues at the expense of taxpayers. It is a relatively minor issue compared to taxpayer subsidies of the energy or banking sectors, and it is unlikely to excite a populist backlash against Elsevier. On the other hand, because it is a somewhat arcane topic, it could be sufficient to find a handful of legislators or politicians in one country to adopt the cause and push for tough action. This could take many forms, such as excluding publishers who refuse to sign offset deals from receiving public funding for APCs or barring Elsevier from public contracts. Any governmental action would be litigated in court and would introduce further uncertainty and create a reputational risk which could affect the share price of Elsevier and force it to change course of action on OA.  

   Similarly, Elsevier could be subject to anti-trust action. A complaint was lodged in October 2018 with the European Commission, alleging that RELX practices violate two articles of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union. Whether the European competition authorities will pursue the case remains unclear at this stage, but the expansion of Elsevier’s activities into the provision of data analytics back to universities may raise further concerns.

**Springer Nature Group**

**The Basics**

The Springer Nature Group is the result of the 2015 merger of Springer Science+Business Media with the majority of the businesses owned by Holtzbrinck and operating as part of McMillan Science and Education. The company has two main shareholders: Holtzbrinck Group (a German family-owned publisher) which has 53% of the shares, and BC Partners (a European private equity firm) which has the balance (except for a small stake still owned by the Government of Singapore, which owned Springer before its sale to BC Partners). The Springer/Nature merger was quite expensive: BC Partners acquired Springer in 2013 for an estimated €3.1 billion and then agreed to give Holtzbrinck 53% of the equity of the combined entity. If by January 2015, when the Nature merger was announced, BC Partners valued its stake in Springer at least equally to its original investment, this means that Nature Publishing Group was valued at €3.5 billion, underlying the unique quality of its assets.

Springer Nature Group is the single largest publisher of scholarly journals, with about 3,000 titles. In terms of revenues, however, Springer is second to Elsevier with estimated journal revenues of €1.150/$1.333 billion (30% of Springer’s reported 2017 revenues of €1.64/$1.9 billion, in fact, derive from the sale of books). Its operating profit margin of 22.8% is also well below Elsevier’s 36.8%.

Historically, Nature Publishing Group, the publisher of Nature, has been perceived as the highest quality group of scholarly journals. Springer, on the other hand, was always viewed as having a good but not outstanding portfolio of journals. Springer was the first publisher to embrace OA through its acquisition of BioMed Central in 2008. At the time, the deal was viewed as an indication that OA would quickly gain traction among leading publishers. In the following years, however, Springer turned lukewarm on OA, and former CEO Derk Haank (who retired at the end of 2017) was publicly indicating by 2011 that he believed that the collection subscription (aka “big deal”) is “the best invention since sliced bread”. Regardless of whether one agrees with this statement, it is a good indication of the conservative and tough, business- oriented culture of Springer.

**What is the strategy of Springer Nature?**

Springer Nature under Derk Haank and its private equity owners has pursued a very traditional strategy, based on extracting synergies from industry consolidation. The merger with Nature Publishing Group gave Springer another large bucket of costs to cut on top of the relentless pressure on costs exercised by Haank over the years. It also absorbed a significant amount of management time, leaving little or no space for comprehensive initiatives on academic data and analytical services. In fact, its only recent noteworthy deal in research outside of the journal space has been lifting its stake in Research Square (a company that offers language and manuscript editing and translation services to authors of scientific content) to 60% in February 2018.

Springer’s reluctance to enter the data analytics business may also be driven by the €3/$3.47 billion debt of the company. This debt equals about 5.5x EBITDA (as a comparison, RELX Group aims to keep its Net Debt/EBITDA ratio between 2.5x and 3x and was at 2.5x at the interim six months 2018 results), a ratio that is dangerously close to becoming unsustainable. Investors view a Net Debt/EBITDA ratio of 6x or higher as dangerous, particularly at a time when interest rates may start to rise. Management will have probably tried to lengthen maturities and convert debt to fixed rate after the failed IPO (which was meant to raise €1.2/$1.4 billion, earmarked for debt reduction). Nonetheless, it is difficult to imagine that, in the current environment, Springer could afford to shift its strategy to pursuing an Elsevier-like data analytics strategy, which would imply additional investments and losses for some time to come.

**Why did the IPO fail?**

Very simply, the IPO of Springer Nature failed because of a valuation issue. The price range offered to investors (€10.50 to €14.50/share, equal to $12.17 to $16.80/share) implied a valuation of 8.8 to 12.2 times 2019 forecasted EBITDA. This assumes that 2019 EBITDA will come in at about €600/$695 million (an almost 10% increase over the €551/$639 million EBITDA recorded in 2017).

The upper end of this range would have been expensive under almost all circumstances, and even the lower end requires significant confidence that the business will continue to generate adequate revenue and earnings growth for many years to come. In the short term, this is a reasonable assumption, as earnings of scholarly publishers tend to have very low volatility because most customers sign multi-year contracts with pre-defined price inflation terms. On the other hand, there are so many things that could go wrong with this model in the future (in particular because of the rising potential of a shift to Open Access), leading investors to have little faith in the value of forecasted long term earnings.

Our interviews indicate that some investors expected the stock to fall at least another 10-15% after trading started following the IPO, effectively allowing them to buy it at a much more attractive valuation, in part because of the rising stream of negative news coming from both Springer and Elsevier on the negotiations of new subscriptions with leading European and North American customers.

**Going forward...**

The board and management team of Springer Nature are now in a tight spot. It looks difficult to get anything close to the valuation they expect by just running the business as they have to date. Assuming investors will not accept a valuation higher than 7x EBITDA, EBITDA must rise by 20% (+€120/$139 million) to €720/$835 million to achieve the lower end of the valuation range, and by about 75% (+€450/$522 million) to €1.050/$1217 billion to achieve the higher end of the range. After years of cost cutting, there is probably limited scope to radically lower the cost structure to achieve this goal: the company has about €1/$1.16 billion in operating costs (before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization), so even cutting €120/$140 million requires taking out another 10% of expenditures (and over 40% to take out €450/$522 million).

Alternatively, management could try to lift the growth rate of the business. This option, however, looks difficult to execute for two reasons. As we discussed earlier, the company is saddled with significant debt (€3 billion) and this leaves little scope to invest in growth initiatives. In addition, some of the possible growth initiatives would add to the losses in the near term, further clouding the prospect of trying to IPO the business in 2019 or 2020. It is widely thought, for example, that Holtzbrinck did not include Digital Science into the assets of Springer Nature to avoid saddling it with the estimated €10 to 20 million ($11.6 to 23.2 million) in annual losses which Digital Science used to incur at the time (per our interviews – Holtzbrinck does not disclose numbers). Recently, however, Digital Science revenues are rising at a much faster pace (again, per our interviews), and this improvement in performance may lead to reconsideration over whether it should have a future role within Springer Nature (and, in fact, become a key element of the investment case in Springer Nature).

In the end, BC Partners, like all private equity (PE) firms, wants a liquidity event that will allow it to exit the investment. In many cases, PE firms do have the recourse of distributing to their investors the holdings in acquired assets, but this outcome is unpopular with investors and becomes a black mark on a PE firm. The size of Springer Nature may preclude a sale to another scholarly publisher on anti-trust concerns (although, in recent years, regulators have accepted mergers in sectors of the media industry which are even more concentrated, like recorded music). It seems unlikely that a traditional media company would want to step in and own a minority stake in a scholarly publisher. This leaves the Holtzbrinck family or an IPO as the only long term exits for BC Partners. The first course would require a significant effort by Holtzbrinck, who may have to part with other assets (or take a significant debt) to buy out BC Partners – both options appear unpalatable. An IPO remains, therefore, the most logical outcome, but valuation remains a sticky issue, as we have seen. It is also worth noting that the stock market is near its highs, raising the question of what can lift the appetite of investors for this asset. In summary, the timing for an IPO looks increasingly uncertain.

**Implications for the academic community**

Elsevier is the net winner from the IPO’s failure. Had the IPO succeeded, Springer Nature would have had less debt, more flexibility to pursue growth through investments, and it could have also created an uncomfortable peer in the eyes of investors: a low valuation of Springer Nature would have raised questions on the valuation of RELX Group. In fact, the current RELX Group total market value (about £40.7/$53.8 billion, including its Net Debt of £6.2/$8.2 billion at the end of June 2018) implies a valuation of 14.5x the estimated 2018 EBITDA of £2.8/$3.7 billion. Since RELX Group derived about 40% of its 2017 operating profit from Elsevier, even a top of the range 12.2x valuation for Springer Nature would have raised a few questions about the RELX valuation – and a Springer Nature valuation at the bottom of the range at 8.8x much more so. Finally, a publicly listed Springer Nature would have provided a quarterly score card on the performance of Elsevier in terms of revenue growth and margins expansion – and any underperformance would have provided further problems for the management of Elsevier. Instead of facing all these issues, Elsevier stands alone among journal publishers in its strategy of transitioning towards serving the broad academic community on data analytics. Even if Springer Nature does, at some future point, take control of Digital Science, this move will be delayed.

A publicly-listed Springer Nature, with less debt, could have moved towards replicating Elsevier’s strategy, offering a welcome alternative to dealing with Elsevier. This opportunity now looks more remote in time, if at all feasible, leaving Clarivate as the only likely competitor to Elsevier in data analytics going forward.

**Wiley**

**The Basics**

Wiley is the smaller of the three main journal publishers. It publishes about 2,300 journals, so – in terms of titles – it is very close in size to Elsevier. Journal revenues, however, are much lower: in the fiscal year that closed on the 30th April 2018, journal revenues totaled $901.5 million. This number is driven by the lower number of articles published: the company claims to publish only one third of the 500,000 articles submitted every year, translating into about 166,000, substantially fewer than the 430,000 articles which Elsevier publishes; in terms of revenues per article, both Wiley and Springer Nature now appear to earn more than Elsevier (Exhibit 5).

Research is the largest activity within Wiley, accounting for 52% of revenues (largely journals, with a small contribution from Atypon). Books account for 34%, and the balance derives from learning services (increasingly digital, but not exclusively). The company is publicly listed and led by an independent Board, but the Wiley family is still involved.

**What is Wiley's strategy?**

Wiley’s acquisition in 2016 of Atypon for $120 million, at first glance, seems to underline management’s belief that the traditional subscription business model will survive. We have modelled the deal based on the data made available by Wiley, supplemented by interviews. Based on these data points, Wiley would have to believe that Atypon could grow its standalone cash flow (i.e. the cash generated by the business for its previous owners, with no synergies) by 2% in perpetuity to justify the price.

We doubt that Wiley’s management is just taking unwarranted risks. Wiley could justify a very expensive valuation because of its synergies with Atypon. Our interviews suggest that Wiley never achieved a satisfactory digital distribution. Interscience was heavily overstaffed with as many as 400 FTE employees and may have cost Wiley as much as $60 million/year. If Wiley could save only two thirds of its Interscience costs and it lost all external revenues, the deal would still make sense financially. Of course, this conclusion hinges on several assumptions. The greatest sensitivity is to the actual costs savings, which in turn depend on the number of Interscience employees at the time of the deal. If that number is directionally correct, then all other sensitivities are relatively minor. If we are correct, Wiley has invested substantial resources to eradicate an operational problem. This makes a lot of sense financially and operationally, but it also means that management has had less time (and resources) to think, develop, and execute a data strategy.

**Clarivate**

**The Basics**

Clarivate is the name the new private equity owners (Onex and Baring Asia) gave to the assets previously owned by Thomson Reuters when they acquired them in 2016 (but management had already decided to sell it by 2015). In our view, Thomson Reuters decided to sell the business for two reasons: it was small, relative to its portfolio at the time (Exhibit 6), and it was not providing the same reliable mid-single digit revenue growth it had enjoyed until a few years earlier (Exhibit 7). In addition, the management of Thomson Reuters believed that changes in the journal business and the rise of OA would add to uncertainty over the future business model, potentially putting pressure on valuations. At the same time, the business’ high profitability meant that a sale would generate substantial amounts of cash.

The sale price ($3.55 billion) implied a valuation of about 11.5x 2017 EBITDA ($310 million). At the time of the sale, the latest reported full year EBITDA (for the Fiscal Year 2015) was $313 million (and in 2016, when the assets were mostly owned by Thomson Reuters, the EBITDA was $315 million). At the end of 2018, the company carried a substantial amount of net debt ($2.007 million, slightly higher than the $1.965 million it reported at the end of 2016), implying a net debt/EBITDA of 6.5x (6.2x at the end of 2016), higher than the 5.5x of Springer Nature. This means that management operated under significant constraints in terms of investments. However, in January 2019 Clarivate announced that the company would merge with Churchill Capital Corp, becoming a public company listed at the NY Stock Exchange. The company guided that the transaction implied an entity value of $4.2 billion, with valuation of 12.5x 2019’s estimated EBITDA (implying a 2019 EBITDA of about $335 million). Clarivate also disclosed that its net debt had declined to $1.3 billion thanks to the closing in Q4 2018 of the sale of its Intellectual Property Management business (in part offset by the acquisition of TrademarkVision). This means that the Net Debt/ EBITDA ratio of Clarivate has declined to about 3.9x – a ratio which is still high, but is more manageable and provides management with some room to invest going forward.

**What is Clarivate's strategy?**

When Thomson Reuters owned the science business, it kept it separate for many years from its other assets in the space (healthcare and IP), pursuing a strategy narrowly aimed at serving libraries and academic institutions with leading tools which would be neutral in the eyes of its customers and the scholarly communications industry. After the disposal of most of the healthcare assets in 2012, it became apparent that there was an opportunity to consolidate science and intellectual property in one group, with the view of offering, over time, products which bridged data on basic research with data on commercial applications.


It is unclear to what extent the new owners of the business support this strategy. Despite the high level of debt, the company has made two acquisitions aimed at modernizing its research offerings: Kopernio, which is integrated into Web of Science, and Publons, which fits with ScholarOne, the manuscript management system. However, neither of these upend the company’s strategy as a neutral data analytics supplier to researchers and librarians. For many smaller publishers that are unable to compete with the investment budget of Elsevier, Clarivate offers the ideal partner to enhance their services.

Integration within Clarivate between scientific and academic research and the other areas of activity is less prominent. In fact, the few interviews given by Annette Thomas, the CEO of the Scientific and Academic Research Group, are focused on the core business. Nonetheless, we think that integration between core data analytics and intellectual property remains a significant opportunity, as it can lead to serving both universities when seeking deeper ties (and funding) with industry, and industry when looking at identifying, understanding, and supporting relevant research in its early stages.

**Other Publishers**

In general, we view any publisher below the size of Wiley as unlikely to have the financial resources to mount a major challenge to the research data analytics businesses of Elsevier and Clarivate. There are, however, a couple of noteworthy comments:
1. Holtzbrinck must decide what to do with Digital Science. The business was not included in the merger of Springer and Nature Publishing Group (reportedly, because its losses would saddle the performance of the combined entity). Digital Science’s original strategy was to build an open, neutral infrastructure, but that course is slightly changing. In part, the culture internal to Digital Science, with its collection of entrepreneurs pursuing their vision means that integrating the companies into a single, cohesive offering is very difficult. In part, Holtzbrinck probably does not wish to invest vast amounts of money to grow it to the point where it can mount a serious challenge to Elsevier or Clarivate. On the other hand, adding Digital Science to Springer Nature may allow them to tell a more credible story to investors, which may help selling an IPO which looks difficult to attempt again.

2. Some smaller, independent data analytics companies are also gaining traction. Academic Analytics is one of the most prominent, but other companies are also launching specific products and services targeting the academic research community.
