---
layout: post
title: The Companies Part Two
category: landscape-analysis
tags:
description: Estimating market share among publishers has been difficult. Higher education publishers report their revenues to the AAP (Association of American Publishers), which aggregates and circulates them. The consistency of the reporting has been called into question, however, in part because there is no clarity about whether all of the publishers are consistently reporting their courseware revenues (some may include sales of teaching materials, while others may only report courseware shipments).
permalink: /landscape-analysis/the-companies-part-2
date: 2019-03-29 08:00:00
---

### Pearson

#### The Basics

Pearson is the remnant of what used to be a very large British conglomerate. The company started as a construction company in 1844, but by 1920 it had exited the construction business and started to diversify into finance (it owned a stake in Lazard) media and non-media assets (Chateaux Latour, the Madama Tussaud operations). Media assets included a chain of newspapers managed within the Westminster Press Group, the Financial Times and a 50% stake in The Economist, Penguin (a trade book publisher), various TV production businesses (which were later sold to RTL). All these assets have been divested totally or partially over time (like in the case of Penguin), leaving the education publishing assets at the core of what the company does.

Longman was the initial core of Pearson’s education business. Over time, the company acquired, among others, Scott Foreman, the textbook business of Harper Collins, Prentice Hall, Addison Wesley, and the textbook business of Simon & Schuster. The acquisition of NES (National Education Systems) in 2006 effectively set Pearson on the path to transform itself into a digital learning company. Since 2011, as revenue growth started to falter, Pearson has been sizing down its educational portfolio as well.

At its core, the company aims at participating in education sectors that it expects to transition to full digital delivery of content and services, enabling itself to add value
to content through data analytics. Thus, the company decided to exit the U.S. K-12 courseware sector, despite holding a leading market share. Management, in the end, decided that financial constraints, the opposition from segments of the educational community, and the highly-decentralized nature of U.S. school districts when it comes to technology decisions means that digital transformation of U.S. schools would either not happen or happen in ways that would make it difficult to build a profitable digital business for Pearson.

This leaves higher education at the core of Pearson’s educational activities in the U.S., with another assessment business that is smaller and significantly less profitable than the higher education business. The company does not disclose operating margins by line of business, but we think that higher education should be a low twenties operating margin business, vs. low teens for assessment.

North American Higher Ed revenues account for 26% of Pearson’s total revenues of £4.513/$5.972 billion and for 40% of North American revenues. In addition, Higher Ed services (which include activities like running the online activities of several colleges and universities, account for another 5% of total revenues and almost 8% of North American revenues (Exhibit 12).

The company does not disclose the profitability of individual business lines.
North America recorded an operating profit margin of 13.5% in 2017. Historically, we estimate that higher education operated at an operating profit margin in the low twenties, while school courseware would operate at mid to high teens and assessment at low teens. These margins have declined in recent years as demand contracted across the board.

#### The Issues

Pearson has been the only publicly listed leading textbook publisher for several years. For many years, the main competitors (McGraw-Hill Educations and Cengage) struggled to perform adequately. In the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008, at first Pearson enjoyed a grace period, as U.S. Higher Ed enrollment grew because of the weakening labor market, and K-12 textbooks budgets could still benefit from the lag between the downturn in the economy and pre-approved spending decisions. By 2011-12, however, as the labor market started to show signs of improvement, enrollment in U.S. colleges started to peak, and school districts pulled back spending. In 2012, Apollo Group (a private equity firm) acquired McGraw-Hill Education, while in 2014, Cengage reorganized after an organized bankruptcy. New management teams started to improve the competitive performance of both companies at the exact time when the market started to decelerate, aggravating the performance issues of Pearson.

Because of several profit warnings, the share price of Pearson has undergone a substantial decline (and a recovery in recent months). The stock peaked in March 2015 at £14.92; by January 2016, it had declined to £6.90 and, by September 2017, to £5.69. Since then, it has recovered to £9.17 thanks to more stable performance and the decision to dispose of several assets, as well as reduce costs aggressively.

Management has been very vocal, at least with the financial community, about the declining value of print-based textbooks in the long run, to the point that many investors interpreted the message as “the long-term value of the print textbook business is zero”. Whether management meant to convey this message is irrelevant; Pearson has educated the financial community that only digital courseware and data analytic services will have value in the future. Effectively, Pearson is now committed to driving the fastest possible adoption of digital courseware, and exiting business where this transition is unlikely or impossible.

Pearson has explicitly highlighted, in some of its investor presentations, how data analytics can affect outcomes for students. Very clearly, management believes that digital tools are not just aimed at the face value benefits of streamlining learning, increasing faculty productivity, and lowering costs. A combination of student profiling through adaptive learning tools (which identify the best way to teach to different segments of students), and reporting (through the analysis of study and testing performance of students) is expected to transform schools with very large enrollment numbers, where it is less cost effective to monitor individual students. Pearson’s strategy of focusing its textbooks on institutions with large numbers of students and a lower rate of student achievement naturally leads to developing and marketing these tools.

### McGraw-Hill Education

In March 2013, McGraw-Hill closed the sale of its education business to Apollo, a private equity company for $2.4 billion in cash. In the nine months before the sale was announced, the company had achieved a 15.8% operating margin, while EBITDA in 2013 was negative (making any multiple not meaningful).

McGraw-Hill Education operates across higher education, K-12, and professional markets, but is very dependent higher education, which accounts for 41.5% of its revenues (Exhibit 13). The company exited the assessment business in 2015, effectively going in the opposite direction of Pearson, which has decided to abandon K-12 courseware and stay in assessment.

Apollo has hoped for a long time to IPO the business to exit the investment. Net debt at the end of 2017 stood at $1.832 billion, implying a net debt/EBITDA ratio of 8.5x. An IPO that would raise fresh funds and pay down debt would be quite a relief to management, but so far has proven impossible to pull off. The company filed papers in 2015 and again in 2016, but market conditions have prevented Apollo from carrying out this step. The company has spent about $700 million in technology since Apollo acquired it, and this demand on its cash flow shows in the net debt, which peaked in 2016 at $1.927 billion, rising from $1.242 billion at the end of 2013 (the year of the acquisition).

### Cengage

Cengage is the successor company to the old Thomson Learning (Thomson education business), which was sold to APAX (a London-based private equity company) and Omers (an Ontario pension fund) in 2007. The company is largely focused on the higher education market. Its learning segment accounts for almost 65% of revenues, and Gale, the primary sources business which sells mostly to colleges and universities, accounts for another 16% (Exhibit 14).

Cengage is a pioneer in inclusive access and Cengage Unlimited, its full catalog subscription, was the first full offering of this kind. Cengage was also the first major publisher to offer a product branded as open educational resources (OER), although the content is still purchased by students enrolled in a course. In recent years, Cengage has been the most visible of the major companies in slashing their prices and reframing their products as a solution to the high cost of textbooks (although they continue to offer traditional products as well). Anecdotal evidence has revealed aggressive marketing tactics for Cengage Unlimited, including contacting student governments to request help lobbying the administration to purchase the full catalog subscription.

Cengage struggled significantly in the years after the Apax/Omers acquisition. It tried to improve its performance by raising prices aggressively, but it could not avoid a reorganization and an organized bankruptcy in 2013, with the goal of shrinking the $5.8 billion of net debt it had at the time. The original acquisition cost Apax $7.75 billion, to which must be added the $750 million to acquire the college textbook business of Houghton Mifflin in 2008 and the textbook business of National Geographic in 2011 for an undisclosed amount. In the end, the debt burden proved too onerous, and the restructuring allowed the company to bring it back to acceptable levels. As of the 31st March 2018, the company had a net debt of $1,932.3 million. Since the adjusted EBITDA was $298.5 million, the net debt/equity ratio is a high, but still manageable at 6.5x.

The long-term exit plan for the owners of Cengage is not clear. An IPO would be subject to the same investor sentiment which has prevented McGraw-Hill Education to complete its own IPO. An industry sale could run into anti-trust concerns, since the three largest publishers hold a substantial share of the market and any consolidation among them would raise concerns.

### Other Publishers

It is worthwhile to note that there are other, smaller publishers in the Courseware business. Wiley, MacMillan, and SAGE all have higher education textbook businesses, often with one or more areas of specific focus (for example, Macmillan has an historic focus on the social sciences and humanities, and Wiley has always been very visible in business). OpenStax, a nonprofit open textbook publisher operating out of Rice University, has successfully launched a set of introductory for high enrollment courses. These textbooks are openly licensed, free online, and available in print at a low cost, and are also backed by a marketplace of optional supplemental materials.

Estimating market share among publishers has been difficult. Higher education publishers report their revenues to the AAP (Association of American Publishers), which aggregates and circulates them. The consistency of the reporting has been called into question, however, in part because there is no clarity about whether all of the publishers are consistently reporting their courseware revenues (some may include sales of teaching materials, while others may only report courseware shipments). Additionally, revenues are reported at the time of shipment (minus provisions for estimated returns), so publishers could potentially inflate revenues in any one quarter or year by shipping larger numbers of books during that time (or lowering their estimates for returns). Finally, as publishers scrambling to ink deals with institutions that trade higher sell-through rates in exchange for temporary discounts, revenues may not be the most reliable indicator of market share at this point of transition.
