---
layout: post
title: Research
categories: landscape-analysis
tags:
description: This document is designed to provide higher education leaders with an analysis of the leading commercial players’ strategies in this domain, the implications of those
strategies, and a preliminary set of possible broad-stroke strategies that higher
education institutions might consider taking to secure outcomes consistent with their
own values and goals.
permalink: /research
---

## Background - An Industry in Transition

After a window between the late nineties of the 20th century and the mid-teens of the
21st, when the STM industry grew its revenues by about 5% annually, available data
suggests that the industry’s subscription revenue growth has slowed down to perhaps
1-2%. OA revenues have been rising faster, lifting overall revenue growth to 3-4%,
still below the growth rate of a decade ago, but introducing a new uncertainty over
the future revenue trajectory of the industry. In 2018, STM (a publishers’ trade body)
estimated that growth in the next few years would average 4% annually, suggesting
that contracts were still being signed at about that annual growth rate, but this growth
is contingent on the outcome of many unknowns.

Will caps be introduced on APCs? Will hybrid journals remain viable? Will new
contractual forms (offsets, R&P, P&R, etc.) lead to overall revenue growth? The
paradox of the STM publishing industry is that it has very high visibility over its
revenues in the next two to three years (because of multi-year contracts) and very
little beyond this time frame.

It is not surprising that many publishers would seek additional opportunities for
revenue growth, and leveraging data and data analytics is the most obvious “next
step” for companies that already own vast amounts of research data, both in terms of
content and usage.

# The Companies

## Elsevier

**The Basics**
Elsevier is the name usually attributed to RELX Group’s Scientific, Technical, and
Medical business. RELX Group (known until 2015 as Reed Elsevier) is a London-based
provider of information, data, and analytical services for corporate, professional, and
academic customers. Elsevier is RELX’s largest area of activity, accounting for 33.7%
of its revenues but 40.5% of its profits. It is also the most profitable business within
RELX’s portfolio, although Risk & Business Analytics is a close second.

**How well does Elsevier compete in journal publishing?**
Elsevier is not the largest publisher of STM journals in terms of titles (Springer Nature
Group publishes about 3,000 titles), but it has the largest journal revenues: Springer
Nature Group had 2017 revenues of €1.64/$1.9 (at an exchange rate of 1.16) million,
but about 30% of that was books, leaving journal revenues at about $1.333 million,
well below Elsevier’s estimated $1.8 million.

There is no undisputed source for market shares in the journal business. STM
estimates that the journal market is worth about $10 billion. Assuming that 55% of
Elsevier’s 2017 revenues came from journals, that translates into £1.363 million which - at the average exchange rate for the year – equals $1.756 million (a 17.5% market
share). This number appears directionally correct, as the approximately 2,500 Elsevier
journals account for about 9% of all journals published, and revenues per articles at
Elsevier should be much higher than for the average of the industry¹.

Elsevier, however, attracts a disproportionate amount of attention within the academic
community because of its profitability and its business practices. Elsevier operates at
a 37% reported operating profit margin compared to Springer Nature which operates
at a 23% margin. Elsevier has often pursued tone-deaf business practices, which have
been viewed as a land grab by the academic community. For example, Elsevier has
refused in many countries to sign offsetting deals for publishing Open Access articles
in subscription journals and has also engaged in relentless lobbying activity in both
the U.S. and Europe to extend copyright in novel directions. Elsevier now routinely
bypasses librarians and attempts to strike deals with other offices within large
academic institutions. In response to the concerns of its critics, Elsevier would argue
that it enjoys record revenues and profitability for the following reasons: it manages
itself well, researchers want to be published in their journals, it funds activities for
Open Science and for integrity in research more than any other publisher, and it sells
data analytics services because the academic and research communities need them.

Both sides of this argument miss an essential point. The adversarial relationship
between Elsevier and academic librarians (and some researchers) is an anachronism
and a throwback to management practices that have long disappeared in virtually
every other industry. The existence of SPARC, the periodic Elsevier boycotts from
some groups of academics, and the announcements from European consortia (and,
more recently, from the University of California) willing to lose access to Elsevier
journals rather than agree to requested price increases all point to a flaw in how
Elsevier (and some competitors) are run.

Historically, Elsevier has pursued price increases in the region of 5% annually,
and justified this request with the parallel 5% growth in articles it publishes. This
argument is flawed for two reasons: it assumes that there are neither productivity
gains nor scale economies anywhere in the business. The first part of the argument
is surprising – if productivity at Elsevier does not rise, then management is not doing
its job properly – and the second part of the argument is wrong – administration or
IT staff does not rise just because more articles are published. In light of the financial
pressure on academic library budgets, refusing to pass along some of the savings
is strictly a commercial and business decision, but it does invite retaliation from
customers when possible. We have seen that Elsevier is effectively reinvesting some
of these gains in new products and services which offer no benefit to libraries, as
they are targeted to other users within universities (and even to completely different customers). In other words, librarians are asked to bear the financial burden of
investments which will benefit some other category of customers, as well as the
shareholders and management of Elsevier.

Another issue with the request for an annual increase based on a larger number
of articles published is the quality of those additional articles. Just because it is
additional research does not make it equal in quality. In general, a large amount of
published research may end up of limited or no use to subscribers. Data released by
ten UK universities on readership in chemistry and life sciences journals show that
50% of journals account for 5 to 10% of all article readership (Exhibits 1 and 2). This
pattern applies to Elsevier journals as well: when New Mexico State University decided
in 2010 not to renew one of its collection contracts with Elsevier, it published the data
relating access to readership for the journals included in the collection (Exhibit 3). In
the absence of obligations for leading journals to add articles at a pace that is at least
in line with the overall growth rate of articles published, there is a significant risk that the average “quality” of the articles will decline. This, in turn, is a contentious issue for librarians asked to fund a growing number of journals and articles with no guarantee that their quality will be adequate.
